[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Well,
welcome to this edition
of "Beyond Belief."
We've got a great program
in store for you today.
Mark Combs with us.
He's an investigative researcher
dealing with ancient mysteries.
And the mysteries, we will
talk about on this program.
One of his books,
"End the Beginning."
>>He says he has
discovered what life was
like before Noah's great flood.
Author Mark Combs is
fascinated with the history
of man and biblical mysteries.
His book, "End the Beginning,"
cross-references ancient texts
with modern science to uncover
the true events leading
to the Flood and the reason
for mankind's destruction.
Mark explains how accepting
a completely different past
is necessary to
understanding our future.
Today, on "Beyond Belief."
>>NOORY: Mark, I've
got to ask you,
with a great introduction
about who you are, how did you
get involved in this?
>>MARK COMBS: This
Is something that's
a part of my
background and study
of things that just caught my
attention and interested me.
And a lot of the things
that are in this book
reflect my personal
journey with regard
to questions about
this story that I
felt like deserved answers.
And so, I wanted to dig and
ferret out the information.
So a lot of the things
that are in this book
are not my personal
opinion as much
as they are documented
research and where
the research takes the story.
>>NOORY: Now, you said
something interesting too.
You said "this story."
And I've always wondered if
what we read in the Bible--
about Noah, for example, and
that flood and everything
leading up to it
and afterwards--
was merely just a story.
>>COMBS: Well, I
think we have to keep
in mind that the first
few chapters of the Book
of Genesis, as it
is presented for us,
covers a period of about
2,000 years of human history.
And the average reader could sit
down and read those 10 chapters
in 35 to 40 minutes.
So there's not a
lot of detail there.
Most of it is overview.
But we do get some highlights.
The story of the Flood gives
us, perhaps, the most detail.
But even in that, it's
still a highlight.
There is a lot of other
aspects of this story
that you find in
other literature
outside the biblical text.
>>NOORY: We have to assume that
something dramatic happened
during that time period.
Is that a pretty accurate guess?
>>COMBS: I think, if
we could physically
compare the world
before the Flood
to the world we have today, we
would see a drastic difference.
If you're talking
about a global flood,
you're talking about
an extinction level
event that changed things
on a catastrophic level.
So obviously there's going to be
a pre-flood, post-flood drastic
change.
>>NOORY: Has science caught
up with the actual date
of this tragedy?
This catastrophe?
>>COMBS: In some areas
I think they have,
keeping in mind
that science sees
flood regions around the world.
They don't connect them as
all being a part of the same.
And in many areas,
we date things
according to the geology
of that specific area.
One of the most
compelling stories-- and I
have a couple of books on this.
And many of your viewers
may have seen documentaries
on the flood involving
the Black Sea.
It's a really compelling story.
And I believe it
gives us something
to really grasp what a
catastrophic flood would
do to a region.
So in some senses,
I think science has.
>>NOORY: What are the
possibilities of what
might have caused this flood?
>>COMBS: I think the
possibilities really
have to be something of
an external force that
affected the earth in
a catastrophic manner.
And we tried to track
that within the book.
What I ended up with wasn't
what I had in my mind
when I started my research.
But it was where
the research led.
And so, as I track through the
book, I'm getting into an area
where I didn't really
want to go initially.
But it's where the
research is pushing me.
And it's where we
take the reader.
>>NOORY: Are we
talking about rain?
An asteroid?
What happened?
>>COMBS: Well, you've got, as
it's presented in the Bible,
a mixture of a couple of things.
You've got a period of rain
that lasts for 40 days and 40
nights and nonstop.
>>NOORY: Tha's a lot of rain.
>>COMBS: That's a lot of rain.
And it causes some
problems, scientifically,
that you have to resolve.
And we kind of approach
those in the book.
Because that much rain changes
the heat in the atmosphere.
Not only would it
flood everything,
it would basically
cook everything
within the Earth's atmosphere.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>COMBS: So you have
to resolve that,
or no one is going to survive
this event, even if they
are in a boat that
floats with all
their collection of animals.
The other aspect is
the Bible tells us
that we have waters that
come from under the earth.
Well, if there's waters that
are coming from the fountains
under the earth, how do you
get those to the surface?
So you've got a mixture of
those two things going on
that you have to meld into
one compelling event that
fits together.
And I think we've put those
puzzle pieces together
in a way that the
reader can follow.
>>NOORY: And are we talking
about a world-wide flood?
>>COMBS: A lot of
people want to speculate
that it's a global flood.
But, George, I really
struggled with that.
The Black Sea event
is a local flood in--
>>NOORY: It's isolated.
>>COMBS: --that particular area.
It's isolated.
But the Bible
presents flood waters
that precede and
exceed more 15 cubits
above the highest mountain.
Well, when you start exceeding
above the highest mountain,
where do the waters
stop after them?
Well, you get to the next
mountain, to the next mountain,
to the next mountain.
Unless you put the entire
globe inside of a container,
you can't flood it without
it being a global flood.
So that's kind of where I
was backed into that corner.
This is a global flood event.
And it really can't
be seen any other way.
>>NOORY: Mark,
prior to the Flood,
what's the planet look like?
>>COMBS: I think,
prior to the Flood,
we've got an interesting
planet from the aspect
of its inhabitants and
also from the aspect
of its geological composition.
And as far as the
inhabitants are concerned,
there is a lot of people
who would speculate
that, in ancient times, there's
a very sparse population living
in a very unorganized manner.
But I think we can
see, through really
looking at details, that
this covers a period of time
from the beginning
up to the Flood
itself of over 1,600 years.
And the first command that's
given to Adam and to Eve,
if we want to start with them--
>>NOORY: That's going way back.
>>COMBS: The first command
is, be fruitful and multiply.
So where can our population go
over a period of 1,600 years?
I think you've got a
thriving population.
Our country just
celebrated, I think,
it's 240th anniversary
as a country.
Our population in the United
States is over 320 million.
So to think that the population
of the ancient world,
over a period of 1,650 years
didn't grow exponentially
to a large thriving population
is nothing short of nonsense.
The other thing-- and
this is where I really
dug in on the scientific
end with the work
of several geologists.
The other thing is the
aspect of the composition
of the ancient world.
I think it was a
different planet.
And we researched the works
of Alfred Wegener, who's
probably most famous
for his proposal
of the theory of Pangea.
And continental drift
grew out of that.
There's also--
>>NOORY: And you
can see that happen.
When you--
>>COMBS: Oh, absolutely!
>>NOORY: --move those continents
back in, it fits like a glove.
>>COMBS: It fits very well.
But there were two
other geologists
that liked his ideas
so much that they
began to research deeper.
One was out of Australia.
His name is Samuel Warren Carey.
The other one's out of Germany.
His name is Ott
Christoph Hilgenberg.
And unfortunately,
his work was never
translated into any other
language other than German.
So I've just been able to
read commentaries of his work.
But both he and Carey worked
independent of each other.
They didn't know about
each other's work.
They both came to
the same conclusion
that, if you take the
oceans out of the way,
that the entire
planet would shrink
and everything would fit
together on a much smaller--
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>COMBS: --planet.
One of the things that science
has done on the heels of this
is they have mapped the geologic
formations of the seabed floor,
of the ocean floor.
And this is something
you can Google,
just ocean floor ages or the
crust of the ocean, the ages.
And you'll get maps
that will tell you
that the crust close to
the continental shelves
is very much older
than the crust that
is closer to our trenches.
And you have to look
at that and go, OK.
How can we see a progression
from a very recent crust here
near the trenches,
near the deepest parts,
to a crust that has been
around for a lot longer?
If you slowly just
kind of remove
that crust little by little,
the entire planet shrinks.
>>NOORY: Shrinks.
>>COMBS: And this is what--
>>NOORY: Almost by
half, I would guess.
>>COMBS: Almost by half.
Almost by 50%.
And this is what these two
geologists were tracking on.
It's more properly known as
the Expanding Earths Theory.
Some people call it the
Growing Earth Theory.
But Samuel Warren
Carey even weighed in
as to how it would affect
everything else on the Earth,
including the Earth's
atmosphere and climate,
which we know was, at one time,
much richer in oxygen content.
It would affect the
flora and the fauna.
We know that we have
animals in ancient times
where-- we have fossils
where not only mammals
but also insects are many
times larger than what
we have in the world today.
And he said it would also
affect the dinosaurs, as far
as their ability to grow
to such enormous sizes.
If you had a smaller earth,
things could grow larger.
The larger the earth
comes, things change.
>>NOORY: Smaller.
>>COMBS: And everything's
affected by that.
>>NOORY: When did
the Flood occur?
>>COMBS: The Flood,
according to the scriptures
and the other texts
that I'm able to dig up,
occurred approximately 1,650
years after the creation event
in the Garden of Eden.
Now, if you try to track
that along the lines of, OK,
when was that BC?
What day can we go to?
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>COMBS: We're
probably going back
into a range of
around 2,300 to-- I'm
going to say-- 2,900 BC.
>>NOORY: So we're talking
about 5,000 years.
>>COMBS: About 5,000 years.
And the reason the BC
years are difficult to date
is because of the
structure of everything
was dated by rulers, who this
ruler was ruling in this time
period.
Another was ruling in
another time period.
So it's not a
clear-cut calendar.
And there's a lot of scholars
who deal specifically
with that.
And they can't come to
a unified conclusion.
>>NOORY: OK.
Hollywood, of course, has tried
to depict the flood of Noah
and what Noah tried to do.
>>COMBS: Mm-hm.
>>NOORY: Let's take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-We built it to the
actual scope that's
described in the Bible,
which is actually
a pretty impressive size ship.
Movies don't really build
things like this anymore.
-We've been designing
the Ark for over a year.
It took us six months to
build and to complete.
The scaffolding you see right
here is what was used by Noah
and his family to
apply the pitch.
The pitch is all of this tar
and straw and sticks and leaves
that were used to seal the Ark.
The idea being
that it was really
made with what was around.
-Did you see He made the forest
to give us wood for the Ark?
How he sent the birds?
Has He not sent
everything we need?
-At the bottom of the
Ark, we have our ballast.
This ballast goes
down another 15 feet.
The ballast is volcanic rock
to keep it from rolling around
in the ocean.
The ramp with there
to serve one function,
for reptiles to be
able to get up there,
for mammals to be
able to get in here,
and birds to fly up to the top.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: Mark, I've
got a difficult time
comprehending that all these
animals would get onto an ark.
>>COMBS: That is one of
the cornerstone questions
that those who are critical
of the story bring up.
It's not only the question of
the animals getting on the Ark.
It's also the
question of, how do
you preserve all of
the species of animals
that we have in
the world today--
>>NOORY: You can't-- it can't--
>>COMBS: --in a space that size?
>>NOORY: The Ark can't
be that big for that.
>>COMBS: Well, and I
have to agree with that.
Now, the structure that we just
saw is an enormous structure.
And I think the
Ark was enormous.
I do like the fact that this was
built in the shape of a box as
opposed to the shape of a boat.
You have to remember, the Ark
wasn't designed to go anywhere.
It was just designed to float.
I do believe that there
were ballast stones.
And they did highlight
that in the story.
That was one of the
things that I researched
that I think played an
important part of making the Ark
seaworthy and steady.
But as far as the animals,
most folks or most researchers
will tell you, we
have in excess of 1
and 1/2 million different
species of animals
in our world today.
And even if they
were kind to us--
to someone trying to sort out
this issue, and we came to them
and we said, but Noah didn't
have to preserve all the sea
life, the mollusks, the
insects, this, this, this--
and they were kind,
and they said,
you know what, let's reduce
that all the way down
to 500,000 different
species of animals,
how do you get those on the Ark?
>>NOORY: Yeah, it just
doesn't make sense.
>>COMBS: You sit down
and do the math, George,
that's over 71,000-- if you were
going to load it in a week's
time, it's over 71,000 pairs
of animals in a 24-hour period.
It's over 3,000 pairs
of animals per hour.
It's over 50 pairs of
animals per minute.
It's over one pair going into
the Ark per second every second
of every minute of every
hour of every day for seven
straight days.
>>NOORY: And who's--
>>COMBS: It just
collapses the story.
>>NOORY: Who's going to
feed them for 40 days?
>>COMBS: Well, you do
have the zookeepers that
have to keep them going, right?
But this is what collapses the
story for a lot of skeptics.
And part of the thing
there is that they
are looking for reasons to
be critical of the story,
not exactly to resolve the
issues that present challenges
for the story.
And that's one of the
things that I really
wanted to do with.
And I wanted to be fair
with those questions.
So we had to sit down
and look at the animal
kingdom in detail.
And just to give
a short example,
the World Canine Association
recognizes in excess
of 340 breeds of animals today.
The American Kennel
Club, I think,
only recognizes about 170.
But we've got all kinds of
different breeds of dogs.
We've even got designer
dogs like Labradoodles--
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>COMBS: --and Cockapoos.
My neighbor has a dog, George.
It's part Labrador
Retriever and part Beagle.
I don't know if it's
a Beagador or a Lable.
>>NOORY: Haha.
>>COMBS: I'm not
sure what it is.
But it's weird.
It looks like a Labrador
down to the body.
>>NOORY: A little one.
>>COMBS: And then, it's-- no!
Its full-size.
>>NOORY: Is it?
>>COMBS: And it has legs that
are about eight inches long.
It's a strange,
strange looking animal.
But these are designer animals.
But they will tell us that
every single breed of dog
in the world today can be
tracked back to a gray wolf
approximately 15,000 years ago.
Well, that leads to
a simple question.
Does Noah need to save every
Dotson, every German Shepherd,
and every Labrador Retriever?
Or does he need to get two--
>>NOORY: Just one.
>>COMBS: --grey wolves?
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>COMBS: These are
the types of questions
that the skeptics will
not ask, because they want
to be critical of the story.
I want to try to find
responsible science that
can maybe provide some
resolution for questions
that I think are
legitimate questions.
>>NOORY: Have you
found that science?
>>COMBS: I think, in a
lot of cases, we have.
We look at that.
I spent an entire
chapter on that
and tried to make it
an entertaining chapter
as we went through.
But spent an entire chapter
on that type of thing,
because the one thing that we
know is that species do change,
especially as they get
isolated into different regions
in different climates.
They undergo a change
over a period of time.
The question is, how long does
it take to enact that change?
Well, how long did it take us
to get from a handful of dog
breeds to in excess of 340?
Less than 200 years.
>>NOORY: Mark, describe
for me the size of the Ark?
The size of the ark
that Noah built?
>>COMBS: This was something
that astounded me.
It was kind of a starting
point in the book.
It's probably my least
favorite chapter.
But I felt like the Ark
is a central character,
as far as this story goes.
How big is this structure?
And what we wanted
to try to break down
was something so that the
reader could put themselves
inside the footprint of the Ark,
regardless of where they were.
I'm a very visual person.
And I can imagine how
big a gallon of milk is
or how big a barbecue pit is.
Something like this,
I really didn't have
any type of a reference point.
So the first thing I did, I
realized that most parking lots
are lined-- excuse me.
And the measurements on
those are exact measurements.
So I can kind of trust those
as far as walking it off.
And I wanted to walk off
the size of the Ark, which
I believe was approximately
500 foot in length
and about 85 foot in width.
>>NOORY: You did that
in a parking lot?
>>COMBS: The first parking
lot I went to was too small.
I had to go find
another parking lot.
>>NOORY: Yeah, it was huge.
>>COMBS: And we found
another parking lot that
was out in front of a theater.
And it was almost long enough
and certainly wide enough.
And then, I wanted to
get something as far
as the height of the Ark.
How tall was this?
The structure that were given
according to the scriptures
is in excess of 50 feet.
So I stood in front
of the theater
where it has the big
structures coming up,
shooting up into the air.
I had my wife take
a picture of me.
And when I got home--
I'm six foot tall,
almost and even
six foot-- I took
and I photoshopped myself and
just stacked myself on top.
And I got--
>>NOORY: Took about eight
or nine of you, huh?
>>COMBS: It would have.
But at six, I ran
out a building.
This building that I
thought was incredibly tall
was about 15 feet short of what
the actual height of the Ark
would have been.
So this was an
enormous structure.
>>NOORY: Well, to give people
a better perspective of what
the Ark looked like
in terms of size,
let's compare it to some of the
objects that are on the planet
today.
>>COMBS: OK.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-The lighthouse of
Alexandria is known
from both ancient writings and
from underwater archaeological
excavations.
Approximately 400
feet tall, it was
constructed in the third
century BC by Ptolemy the first.
It stood for 1,700 years
until its structure
was ruined by earthquakes.
A replica now stands
in Changsha, China.
The Great Pyramid of Giza
stands 455 feet tall.
It represents one of the most
ancient existing structures
in all the world.
It was the tallest
known structure
in the world for
over 3,000 years.
These comparisons can
provide a relative sense
of the length of the
Ark, which is quite long.
But not unreasonable or
surpassing our comprehension.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: That's a
pretty big ship.
>>COMBS: It is.
George--
>>NOORY: How long do you
think it took them to build?
>>COMBS: I think they
were given-- in one area,
I find they were given a
period of about five years.
I've also found some
things that suggest
they were given over 100 years.
But to me, if you take a span
of 100 years to build something,
you've also got-- what
I built 98 years ago,
is it starting to
deteriorate and now I'm
having to repair
that versus-- I think
was probably built in a span
of about four or five years.
>>NOORY: How do we know
the Ark even is real?
And where is it?
>>COMBS: Oh well, I think it
was, at one point, on Ararat.
There's been some geological
disturbances in the area there
that have really changed the
landscape of the mountain.
But I think it was real.
I think it still is real.
It's a more difficult find
today for a number of reasons.
But there's a lot of
historical stories
of people who have encountered
it, seen it, and documented it
over the last 200 or so years,
which is a modern time frame.
A lot of these
stories are documented
in a book called "Noah's
Ark, Fact or Fable?"
that was authored
by Violet Cummings.
The book's out of print now.
But it really does present
some of these things
that you won't
find anywhere else.
So it's a really nice
little volume to have.
About 140 years ago, there
was a tremendous earthquake
in the area.
The mountain is in Armenia.
There was a
tremendous earthquake
in the area which
destroyed a portion
of that mountain and an
area known as Ahora Gorge.
That's the area where the
Ark was in, generally.
>>NOORY: According
to the Bible, right?
>>COMBS: Well, the Bible does
say it was in the mountains
and--
>>NOORY: Of Ararat.
>>COMBS: And the ancient writers
in that 1st century to 200 BC
range-- in that 300 year range--
they all refer to this boat--
those who write about it--
as being an area of mountains
that's in Armenia.
Which is the same area
that the Bible specifies.
>>NOORY: Sure.
Under ice?
>>COMBS: It was under ice in
our more modern-day times.
That mountain range,
in the climate
that it's in-- under ice
portions of the year,
exposed during
portions of the year.
The earthquake that
happened a number of years
ago really destroyed a large
portion of the mountain,
including a small
monastery that was
there that did have
some display, kind of
like a mini museum of the Ark.
And we're talking 150 years ago.
But yeah, there's a lot
of documentation on that.
>>NOORY: I've seen pictures,
historical pictures,
of areas that could look
like there was an ark there,
petrified.
Astronauts have been obsessed
with finding the Ark.
>>COMBS: James Irwin.
>>NOORY: Yep.
>>COMBS: Almost lost his life on
the mountain searching for it.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
And wasn't there some
kind of space shuttle
picture of that region.
>>COMBS: There's been a number
of different radar pictures
by flyovers and, then, I think
some from satellite imagery
and things of that nature.
I have some friends who were
on the mountain in 2013,
archaeologists.
>>NOORY: Mm-hm.
>>COMBS: Bruce--
>>NOORY: Is it safe there still?
>>COMBS: It's really
a political hot zone.
They won't even let expeditions
in, as of right now.
>>NOORY: Ah!
>>COMBS: They haven't let
expeditions in since 2015.
>>NOORY: Its with the
Kurds and people like that?
>>COMBS: Yeah, PKK.
You go over there, you're
basically putting your life
in your own hands.
And it's not safe.
>>NOORY: It's not safe.
>>COMBS: But they were
on the mountain in 2013.
And I got a lot of
information from them
as I was working on things.
They really helped me understand
the mountain and the area,
very detailed in their work.
>>NOORY: Well, what's
so important to this--
and I have always
thought about this
since I was a little
boy fascinated
with the subject-- was that,
if the Ark is ever discovered,
that to me then is proof
that the rest of the Bible
could be very real and accurate.
And that's what's
so amazing to me.
>>COMBS: Well, that's
one of the things that
drew me to this story, because
it's such a polarizing story.
You've got people that
accept it on blind faith.
You got other people that are
critical to the point of just
wanting to take pot shots at it.
And let's be honest.
It's easy to do that.
But if this story is
true, like you said,
it's a history-changing story.
>>NOORY: It's huge!
>>COMBS: It changes everything.
So to say this is
a game-changer,
I think it was a
game-changer in many ways.
But now we're at the point
where, in our modern day,
we want to dismiss it,
scoff at it, or say,
yeah, it's just one of those old
fables that they used to tell.
I think there's a
lot of things that
point to it as being an
actual event and a true story.
>>NOORY: Now, what's
amazing about all of us
is-- let's take God out of
the picture for a moment.
>>COMBS: OK.
>>NOORY: How did Noah know
about building an ark that
took-- how long to build?
>>COMBS: I think it was built
in a four to five year period.
>>NOORY: OK, four to five years.
Tell a story of
some calamity that
was going to occur
on the planet,
whether it was an asteroid, a
flood, or whatever happened--
how did he know this?
>>COMBS: That's a
really good question.
You saw in the movie that we've
had the clip from earlier,
the movie "Noah," that
Russell Crowe plays
the character of Noah.
And God spoke to him in dreams.
And we see several
places in the Bible
where God speaks to
people in dreams.
He spoke to Joseph, who
was in Egypt, via dreams.
He spoke to Daniel,
who was in Babylon.
He even spoke to Nebuchadnezzar,
the King of Babylon,
through his dreams.
But we also see
in places where He
spoke to people
directly, not only some
of the prophets such as the
prophet Samuel, the prophet
Jeremiah, the prophet
Isaiah, and others,
but also, prior to the Flood.
Adam-- it says he walked
in the garden with Adam.
It says Enoch walked with God.
And God spoke with him.
The Book of Enoch says that,
from the time Noah was born,
he conversed with
the Lord of Spirits.
And so, I think He spoke
with Noah directly.
And I think, from the
time Noah was born,
he was being prepared
for this specific task.
>>NOORY: What if-- now,
this is far-fetched.
>>COMBS: OK, I love far-fetched.
>>NOORY: What if a group
of extraterrestrials
came down to the planet,
pinpointed someone like Noah,
gave him a five year
head-start, and said,
an asteroid is coming this way.
It's going to hit the water.
It's going to create the biggest
flood this planet has ever
seen.
You need to get
prepared for that.
Is that possible?
>>COMBS: I think it's possible.
But I think it has
a couple of areas
where it's really lacking,
as far as underlying purpose.
The Bible and ancient
literature present
this extinction-level
event as a judgement.
>>NOORY: Mm-hm, a cleansing.
>>COMBS: Even in the
works of Zechariah--
>>NOORY: Sitchin.
>>COMBS: --Sitchin,
it's presented
as a judgement of the gods.
Now, he uses the alien
influence of the Anunnaki.
As you study a lot of
these ancient texts--
and there are
scholars that do, that
study the cuneiform
tablets, the Sumerian story,
the Babylonian story, the
Akkadian and Assyrian story.
They study them in detail.
And they try to
put them together.
One of the most enriching
productions on this
was by a gentleman
named Amar Annus.
And he wrote the story of
"The Origin of the Watchers."
It's about a 45-page
scholarly document.
So it's really heady stuff.
But he takes in all these
different cultures and all
of their different
influences and dovetails them
all together into a story that
actually makes sense in the way
that it presents things.
I do think we have
an alien influence.
But I don't think
it's extraterrestrial.
I would say it's
interdimensional.
I believe the Watchers
were spiritual beings.
I think they were
interdimensional beings--
>>NOORY: Which is
still an amazing story.
>>COMBS: It is an amazing story.
And it's something that we,
in our modern-day world,
just can't comprehend.
And not necessarily
do we really want to.
We like dealing flesh and blood.
And we've got enough problems
that we've created on our own,
don't we?
>>NOORY: So one of
the questions, Mark,
is how did this story evolve?
Where did it come from?
Let's take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-When you're telling the story
of the beginnings of humanity,
the Flood story is
part of that story.
-Without this
moment of the Flood,
you have no framework
within which
humans can develop the life that
will permit their perpetuity.
You have to have it there.
-But why is a defining
moral tale in the Bible,
forged in the desert
hills of Judeo,
shaped by a flood and a ship?
Where did its
authors get the idea?
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: So Mark, that's
the $64,000 question.
How did this story come about?
I mean, did somebody concoct it?
Was there a good
storyteller in that day?
Or did this really happen?
>>COMBS: I think it's
a valid question.
What we find is that there are
aspects of this story embedded
in flood legends from every
culture around the world,
hundreds of flood legends.
Now, these stories
date back, yes,
to the ancient times
of Babylon, Egypt,
Assyria, and other cultures.
So these aren't
modern-day stories.
They're ancient stories.
And they're embedded
in every single culture
around the world.
And they do carry a lot
of common themes in them.
Some of the common themes being
that the Earth was completely
destroyed, that it was preserved
through the work of one
man and his family, that the
life of the animal kingdom
was preserved along with it.
But also, that it was a
judgment from a supreme being.
All of those are factored in.
There's another
thing that's in a lot
of these legendary stories.
Almost half of them,
just shy of 40%,
include an enormous
object in the sky.
You won't see that
in the scriptures.
You won't see that in a
lot of other literature.
But you will see that
in the flood legends.
You do see it in the--
>>NOORY: Sounds like
an asteroid to me.
>>COMBS: You do see it
in the "Book of Jasher."
It sounds like an asteroid or
possibly even something larger.
As I began to research it,
I think it's absolutely
something larger.
And I think the documented
evidence points to it
over and over and over.
>>NOORY: See, I don't think
God was really as evil
as Genesis projected Him to be.
A god who would come and
want to cleanse the planet
and eradicate it
from all these people
that he wanted to get rid of,
doesn't make a lot of sense
to me.
Instead, I think some
of these ancients
had these events
occurr-- they're real.
Again, I get back to the
asteroid hit the planet.
And it was a
planet-killer-- and had
to come up with a story
that made sense to them.
And that was, the gods did
this to us, because we were bad
and we were evil.
But I don't think there
was a god that would
wipe our all these people.
Because they couldn't
all have been bad.
>>COMBS: Well, that's an
interesting question as it
comes up, not only the people,
but also the rest of creation.
What did the giraffe do?
Did he eat from the
wrong tree as well?
I mean, we've got everything, an
extinction-level event going on
here.
And a lot of people
do present this story
as if it has everything to do
with the evilness of mankind.
I'm sorry, but just
because Bob and Curly-Sue
got a little out
of hand, I don't
think that's a reason
to wipe out the planet.
I think there's something
much deeper going on here.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>COMBS: And that's
one of the questions
that I wanted to try and track
through the entire storyline.
Because it's the
underlying question.
Is God just angry
and evil and decides
to throw a temper-tantrum
and destroy the planet?
Or is God justified
in what he does?
Is the destruction of
the planet the only way
to preserve life going forward?
And I think a lot
of the documentation
would point us toward
that second alternative.
>>NOORY: Or maybe God had
nothing to do with it.
Maybe it was a calamity, a
catastrophe, an earth-changer,
that was going to
occur regardless.
>>COMBS: I think
it was something
that was going to occur.
I do think it was
definitely Earth-changing.
We see that portrayed
in all of the cultures.
My own perspective,
from the studies
that I've done, from the
materials that I've pulled,
I can't pull God
out of the story.
I just can't.
I think part of it that keeps
Him attached to the story
is that this is His
original creation that He's
responsible for.
He's the agent that put it all
in place in the first place.
And in these actions,
He's also the agent
that is preserving it, for
a time that's yet future.
And we say preserving it.
We are setting it aside for
something that's yet to come.
>>NOORY: As you look at
this entire scenario,
this very strange
scenario, what have you
concluded just
with your own work?
>>COMBS: I think that
the time that we see
points to a very specific
event that happened
for a very specific reason.
And in the first century,
you have Christ who people
regard in different ways.
Is he a great teacher?
Was he deity?
Was he this?
Was he that?
Well, we have the
preserved words of Christ.
And one of the
things that he did
say-- regardless of
what a person may
think of who he actually
is-- one of the things
that we have on
record is he said,
as it was in the days of
Noah, so shall it be in a day
yet future.
So from my perspective, those
two things are tied together.
And I can't do that knot.
Because we're told
that an event that
happened in the past
foretells, foreshadows,
points to, and outlines an event
that is coming in the future.
>>NOORY: So you think
it might repeat itself?
>>COMBS: I think it's definitely
going to repeat itself,
not in the way of a flood,
but in something else that's
also very devastating.
When Christ made that
statement, he said, men's hearts
would fail them for fear for the
things coming upon the Earth.
That the powers in the
heavens would be shaken.
That the stars would
fall from the sky.
I take that to be meteors
rather than-- I mean, we know--
>>NOORY: Something.
Objects.
>>COMBS: We know the
stars are something else.
But we, even today,
refer to them
as shooting stars when we see--
tshh-- the little meteor trail.
But he said, the moon and the
sun would not give their light.
The Old Testament prophets--
Amos writes, in Amos Chapter 8,
that I will cause the sun
to go down at noonday.
Zachariah says it
won't be light or dark.
It will be that
in-between twilight
that we experience at
the poles, if you've ever
been to Alaska or
some of these places
where they don't
quite ever get dark
and they don't quite
ever get fully lit.
They're talking about
the city of Jerusalem.
That's what they're
writing about.
And they're saying, there
is coming a time when
it's going to be like that.
The sun will go down at noonday.
And it's going to be
twilight not bright light.
That's what the prophets
are pointing to.
I think that's what Christ
is alluding to as well.
>>NOORY: If Genesis did
not talk about Noah,
would we even know about this?
>>COMBS: I think we would have
stories from other cultures.
The Babylonians
have their story.
The Greeks, theirs.
>>NOORY: It's almost
like there's--
>>COMBS: So there's a lot
of things-- the Sumerians.
There's a lot of things
that are preserved for us.
So I think we'd have a
concept of the story.
I think the Hebrews, when
they put this together--
and I do feel like this
portion was put together
after the Babylonian
captivity, which
would have put it
somewhere around the time
period of 500 to 550 BC.
And I think that they
were putting it together
to take some of the prevailing
thoughts and correct them.
Because the prevailing thoughts
did not have the Creator
involved.
And from their
perspective, this story
can't be told without the
one who created it also
being the one who destroyed it.
And so, that's what you get
from the Hebrew perspective.
>>NOORY: We've got a
few e-mails in for you.
>>COMBS: OK.
>>NOORY: Gina, from
Tallahassee, Florida.
Were there really two of
every animal on the Ark?
That's a good question.
>>COMBS: It is a good question.
And I think it's something
that, in our own minds,
we've kind of missed what the
Bible tells us about this.
I not only looked
at it in the text
that most people
would read, I also
looked at it in a test
called the Septuagint, which
is a Greek version of
the Old Testament, which
would have been what
Jesus and disciples would
have been reading in their day.
The text, it comes to us
from Genesis 7, verse 2.
And it tells us that
of the clean animals,
he took a male and the
female, seven pairs.
We read that.
And because seven
is an odd number,
we immediately think 14.
Well, it says the same thing
about the unclean animals.
It says of the unclean
animals, take the male
and his female, two pair.
>>NOORY: What's
an unclean animal?
>>COMBS: That comes
to us, I think,
from the Book of Leviticus.
We kind of get a
definition of that there.
Obviously, it's a definition
that's given there.
But it predates the writing of
Leviticus by a number of years.
>>NOORY: But what is it?
>>COMBS: Clean
animals were animals
that could be taken as
food and animals that
could be used to sacrifice.
Unclean animals were animals
that were fit for neither.
>>NOORY: Like snakes
and things like that?
>>COMBS: Things of that nature.
Also, as you go through
the list in Leviticus,
you've got things
such as anything that
has paws as opposed to hooves.
Now, as you look at it--
and a lot of people go,
well, these are strange
dietary restrictions.
As you look at it,
some of these animals
that are considered
unclean are animals
that would eat dead
flesh-- OK-- or animals
that would return to their
own waste and consume that.
And so, those were
considered unclean animals.
It was behavior that the
Hebrew people were not
to observe within themselves.
They weren't to
touch dead bodies
or to have anything
to do with waste.
They would dispose
of a properly.
Well, if an animal
does that by nature,
they are, by nature, unclean.
So I think that's
one of the ways
that we can separate
what's a clean animal?
What's an unclean animal?
Clearly, if Noah is told,
take the clean in this number,
take the unclean in this number,
he has to know the difference.
>>NOORY: See, my
thoughts are, Mark,
is that somehow Noah
had some foretelling
knowledge of some catastrophe.
So he built this ark.
And the animals he
put on it were maybe
his farm animals, whatever
he might have had,
pigs, cows, who knows.
Loaded them on the
ark too with them.
And they waited for this
catastrophe to occur.
>>COMBS: Well, Noah
would have only dealt
with the clean animals
as farm animals.
So when the Bible tells us to
also get the unclean animals,
these are the animals that
he wouldn't have dealt with,
that he really wouldn't have
had anything to do with.
So whereas I think the
aspect does have some premise
that he's dealing with
domesticated animals,
the clean.
He's also dealing
with those that
would have been considered--
you mentioned snakes
or any type of
reptile-- but would
have been considered things
that you don't domesticate.
>>NOORY: Now, the Bible,
is that really the only way
that we would have
known about Noah?
I mean, you alluded
to some other texts.
But I think it's just the Bible.
>>COMBS: Well,
there's other texts
that support the story
that actually give us
more details in other areas.
I introduce three main
texts in the book.
I introduce the
Book of Enoch, which
most people are familiar with.
This is the Book of 1 Enoch.
There's also a second and third.
But we stayed within
the Book of 1 Enoch.
There's also a book that is
called the "Book of Jubilees."
This dates back to
that time period
between the last of the prophets
and the first century arrival
of Christ and the disciples.
>>NOORY: Are these written
by the same people?
>>COMBS: In this
period of time, you
had a lot of people who
wrote things anonymously.
Now, they're
written by scholars.
They're written by scribes.
They're written by
people who are studying.
But they never attach
their name to it.
And in many cases, they
didn't attach their name
to it out of respect.
And so, these
collection of books
are known as Pseudepigrapha,
because we don't know
who actually composed them.
But they do date to
this time period,
which most scholars refer to
as Second Temple literature.
The same thing follows
with the "Book of Jasher."
And some scholars
will accept that
as what we have
today is an accurate
copy of the "Book of Jasher."
Some others criticize it.
But the "Book of Jasher" was a
third book that we brought in.
We try to give a little
bit of background
on each as to why we
were referencing it
and, then, also bring out
the information that's
within that book that
supports and correlates
and helps us to see what the
Bible is trying to tell us.
>>NOORY: So there are
many sources that--
>>COMBS: There are many sources.
>>NOORY: --cooperate
with the fact
that the Ark story is authentic?
>>COMBS: There are many sources,
including just historians
such as Josephus, who wrote
during the first century;
Philo, who wrote a few
hundred years before that.
Even some of your
Greeks, such as m
refer to things along
these same lines.
And we separate
cultures and don't
realize that a
writer such as Philo,
who was a Jewish
writer, actually
referenced Plato,
who was a Greek.
>>NOORY: Well, maybe
one day we'll find out.
And perhaps, the best
way is if we ever find
the Ark, wherever it may be.
I'm George Noory.
Thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]